docs(upgrade) instructions for 3.0 (#9404)
Kong/kong: UPGRADE.md

break your configuration.

**Version prerequisites for migrating to version 3.0.x**

If you are migrating from 2.7.x or a lower version, you should first migrate to 2.8.1.
Learn more about [how to upgrade from 1.0.x - 2.2.x to 2.8.x](#upgrade-from-10x---22x-to-28x)

Once you migrated to 2.8.x, you can follow the following sections to migrate 
to 3.0.x.

### Upgrade from 2.8.x to 3.0.x for Traditional mode

1. Clone your datastore.
2. Download 3.0.x, and configure it to use the cloned datastore. Run `kong migrations up` and `kong migrations finish`.
3. Start the 3.0.x cluster.
4. Now both the old (2.8.x) and new (3.0.x)
   cluster are running simultaneously. Start provisioning the 3.0.x cluster.
5. Gradually shift traffic from your old cluster to
   your 3.0.x cluster. Monitor your traffic to make sure everything
   is going smoothly.
6. Stop your old cluster when your traffic is fully shifted to the 3.0.x cluster.

### Upgrade to 3.0.x for Hybrid mode

Data planes are capable of serving traffic during the process of migration. 

1. Download 3.0.x.
2. Configure a new control plane to use the same datastore
   as your old one. Run `kong migrations up` and `kong migrations finish`.

> 3. Start a new control plane. Old data planes are expected to complain
> about connection failure to the control plane.

Author: ```suggestion
3. Start a new control plane. Old data planes are expected to complain
about connection failure to the control plane in the log, for example,
"connection to control plane ... broken: failed to connect: connection refused".
```

To produce a patch file, use the following command:

```
git diff 2.0.0 3.0.0 kong/templates/nginx_kong*.lua > kong_config_changes.diff
```

**Note:** Adjust the starting version number
(2.0.x, 2.1.x, 2.2.x, 2.3.x, 2.4.x, 2.5.x, 2.6.x, 2.7.x) to the version number you are currently using.

### Suggested upgrade path

Follow the instructions for your backing data store to migrate to the new version.
If you prefer to use a fresh data store and only migrate your `kong.conf` file,
see the instructions to
[install 3.0.x on a fresh data store](#install-30x-on-a-fresh-data-store).

As with all upgrades make a backup of your data store before beginning the process.

You should not configure with admin API during migration, as it may lead to unexpected behavior and
break your configuration.

**Version prerequisites for migrating to version 3.0.x**

If you are migrating from 2.7.x or lower version, you should first migrate to 2.8.1.
Here's how you can migrate to 2.8.1: [Upgrade from 1.0.x - 2.2.x to 2.8.x](#upgrade-from-10x---22x-to-28x)

Once you migrated to 2.8.x, you can follow the instructions in the section
below to migrate to 3.0.x.

> ### Upgrade from 2.8.x (x>=2) to 3.0.x for Traditional mode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Upgrade from 2.8.x to 3.0.x for Traditional mode
```

That is a very strange way to describe version number, I suggest we just remove it.

1. Backup & clone Kong datastore into a separate instance.

> 2. Download & install Kong 3.0.x, and configure it to use the newly cloned data store. 

Author: ```suggestion
2. Download & install Kong 3.0.x, and configure it to use the newly cloned datastore. 
```

3. Start 3.0.x cluster.
4. Now both the old (2.8.x) and new (3.0.x)
   clusters can now run simultaneously. Start provisioning 3.0.x nodes.
3. Gradually divert traffic away from your old nodes, and into
   your 3.0.x cluster. Monitor your traffic to make sure everything
   is going smoothly.
4. When your traffic is fully migrated to the 3.0.x cluster,
   decommission your old nodes.

### Upgrade to 3.0.x for Hybrid mode

Data planes are capable to serve traffic during the process of migration. 

1. Download 3.0.x.
2. Decommission your old control plane.
3. Configure new control plane to point to the same datastore
   as your old control plane. Run `kong migrations up` and `kong migrations finish`.
4. Start new control plane. It is expected that old data planes may complain
about connection failure to the control plane.
5. Start new data planes.
6. Gradually divert traffic away from your old data planes, and into
   your 3.0.x data planes. Monitor your traffic to make sure everything
   is going smoothly.
7. When your traffic is fully migrated to the 3.0.x cluster,

>    decommission your old nodes.

Reviewer: "Stop your old control plane" is probably better. "Decommission" sounds strange 😂

>    decommission your old nodes.

Reviewer: "Old data planes are expected to complain about connection failure to the control plane"

Let's talk about what error message the data plane will log and what it means (sync not possible, but DP retains the last valid config from the old CP)

>    decommission your old nodes.

Reviewer 2: > "Stop your old control plane" is probably better. "Decommission" sounds strange 😂

Agree. 😹

> `connection to control plane ... broken: failed to connect: connection refused` but this is perfectly okay during the upgrade ad does not affect normal proxy traffic.

Author: ```suggestion
`connection to Control Plane ... broken: failed to connect: connection refused` but this is perfectly okay during the upgrade ad does not affect normal proxy traffic.
```

### Installing 3.0.x on a fresh datastore

> The following commands should be used to prepare a new 3.0.x cluster from a
> fresh datastore. By default the `kong` CLI tool will load the configuration
> from `/etc/kong/kong.conf`, but you can optionally use the flag `-c` to
> indicate the path to your configuration file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following commands should be used to prepare a new 3.0.x cluster from a
fresh datastore. By default, the `kong` CLI tool will load the configuration
from `/etc/kong/kong.conf`, but you can use the optional flag `-c` to
specify a configuration file:
```

```
$ kong migrations bootstrap [-c /path/to/your/kong.conf]
$ kong start [-c /path/to/your/kong.conf]
```
Unless indicated otherwise in one of the upgrade paths of this document, it is
possible to upgrade Kong **without downtime**.

Assuming that Kong is already running on your system, acquire the latest
version from any of the available [installation methods](https://getkong.org/install/)
and proceed to install it, overriding your previous installation.

**If you are planning to make modifications to your configuration, this is a
good time to do so**.

> Then, run migration to upgrade your database schema:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, run migrations to upgrade your datastore schema:
```

[breaking changes of 2.x](#breaking-changes-2.0.0).

### Dependencies

If you are using the prebuilt images/packages, you can skip this section 
as they have bundled all dependencies required by Kong.

If you are building your dependencies manually, you will need to rebuild them
with the latest patches as there are changes since the previous release.

The required version of OpenResty is bumped up to [1.21.4.1](https://openresty.org/en/ann-1021004001.html).
We recommend you to use the [openresty-build-tools](https://github.com/Kong/kong-build-tools/tree/master/openresty-build-tools),
which allows you to build OpenResty with the necessary patches and modules more easily.

### Template changes

There are **Changes in the Nginx configuration file**, between kong 2.0.x,
2.1.x, 2.2.x, 2.3.x, 2.4.x, 2.5.x, 2.6.x, 2.7.x, 2.8.x and 3.0.x

To view the configuration changes between versions, clone the
[Kong repository](https://github.com/kong/kong) and run `git diff`
on the configuration templates, using `-w` for greater readability.

Here's how to see the differences between previous versions and 3.0.x:

```
git clone https://github.com/kong/kong
cd kong

> git diff -w 2.0.0 3.0.0 kong/templates/nginx_kong*.lua

Author: I copy&paste this example. I think the original documentation was trying to have a real example, and tell you to change the version to what you want.

to 3.0.x.

### Upgrade from 2.8.x to 3.0.x for Traditional mode

Note: Blue-green migration in traditional mode for versions below 2.8.2 to 3.0.x
is not supported. The upcoming 2.8.2 release will include blue-green migration
support. If you want to perform migrations with no downtime, please wait for the
upcoming 2.8.2 patch release, upgrade to 2.8.2, [then migrate to
3.0.x](#migrate-db).

1. Clone your data store.
2. Download 3.0.x, and configure it to use the cloned data store. Run `kong migrations up` and `kong migrations finish`.
3. Start the 3.0.x cluster.
4. Now both the old (2.8.x) and new (3.0.x)
   cluster are running simultaneously. Start provisioning the 3.0.x cluster.
5. Gradually shift traffic from your old cluster to
   your 3.0.x cluster. Monitor your traffic to make sure everything
   is going smoothly.
6. Stop your old cluster when your traffic is fully shifted to the 3.0.x cluster.

### Upgrade to 3.0.x for hybrid mode

Data planes are capable of serving traffic during the process of migration. 

1. Download 3.0.x.
2. Configure a new control plane to use the same data store
   as your old one. Run `kong migrations up` and `kong migrations finish`.

> 3. Start the new control plane. Old data planes are expected to complain
> about connection failure to the control plane in the log, for example,
> "connection to control plane ... broken: failed to connect: connection refused".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Start the newly installed 3.0.x CP. Old DPs are expected to complain
about connection failure to the CP in the log, for example:
`connection to control plane ... broken: failed to connect: connection refused` but this is perfectly okay during the upgrade ad does not affect normal proxy traffic.
```

> 4. Start new data planes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Start provisioning 3.0.x DPs.
```

> 5. Gradually shift traffic from your old data planes to
>    your 3.0.x data planes. Monitor your traffic to make sure everything
>    is going smoothly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Gradually shift traffic from your old 2.8.x DPs to
   your 3.0.x DPs. Monitor your traffic to make sure everything
   is going smoothly.
```

> 6. Stop your old data planes when your traffic is fully shifted to 3.0.x data planes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. Stop your old DPs when your traffic is fully shifted to 3.0.x DPs.
```

[Kong repository](https://github.com/kong/kong) and run `git diff`
on the configuration templates, using `-w` for greater readability.

Here's how to see the differences between previous versions and 3.0.x:

```
git clone https://github.com/kong/kong
cd kong
git diff -w 2.0.0 3.0.0 kong/templates/nginx_kong*.lua
```

**Note:** Adjust the starting version number
(2.0.x, 2.1.x, 2.2.x, 2.3.x, 2.4.x, 2.5.x, 2.6.x, 2.7.x) to the version number you are currently using.

To produce a patch file, use the following command:

```
git diff 2.0.0 3.0.0 kong/templates/nginx_kong*.lua > kong_config_changes.diff
```

**Note:** Adjust the starting version number
(2.0.x, 2.1.x, 2.2.x, 2.3.x, 2.4.x, 2.5.x, 2.6.x, 2.7.x) to the version number you are currently using.

### Suggested upgrade path

**Version prerequisites for migrating to version 3.0.x**

Kong supports a no-downtime migration model since 1.0. This means that while the
migration is ongoing, you will have two Kong clusters running, sharing the
same database. (This is sometimes called the Blue/Green migration model.)

The lowest version that Kong 3.0.x supports migrating from with no downtime is 2.8.x for hybrid mode,

> and 2.8.2 or beyond for traditional mode.

Reviewer: We can not talk about 2.8.2 until it is released.

Author: removed.

To upgrade to 2.8.x first, please follow the steps described in the section
[Upgrade from 1.0.x - 2.2.x to 3.0.x](#upgrade-from-10x---22x-to-28x)

> Please be aware that you should not change configuration in the process of the blue-green migration, as it may cause unexpected behaviors and break your configuration.

Reviewer 3: Should we change this phrase `blue-green migration`?

Reviewer: This line is too long.

database in the final expected state for Kong 3.0.x).

1. Download 3.0, and configure it to point to the same datastore
   as your old (2.8.2 or beyond) cluster. Run `kong migrations up`.
2. After that finishes running, both the old (2.8.x) and new (3.0.x)
   clusters can now run simultaneously. Start provisioning 3.0.x nodes,
   but do not use their Admin API yet. If you need to perform Admin API
   requests, these should be made to the old cluster's nodes. The reason
   is to prevent the new cluster from generating data that is not understood
   by the old cluster.
3. Gradually divert traffic away from your old nodes, and into
   your 3.0.x cluster. Monitor your traffic to make sure everything
   is going smoothly.
4. When your traffic is fully migrated to the 3.0.x cluster,
   decommission your old nodes.
5. From your 3.0.x cluster, run: `kong migrations finish`.
   From this point on, it will not be possible to start
   nodes in the old cluster pointing to the same datastore anymore. Only run
   this command when you are confident that your migration
   was successful. From now on, you can safely make Admin API

>    requests to your 3.0.x nodes.

Reviewer: This section can not exist until 2.8.2 is released.

Author: removed.

### Upgrade to 3.0.x for Hybrid mode

> For Kong Enterprise, 3.0.x.x control planes downgrades configurations to sync up with 2.8.x.x data planes in the same way it supports minor version compatibility.

Reviewer: I don't think we should discuss EE upgrade mode here, only shows user how to migrate to 3.0 by stopping the CP and then spawn new 3.0 DPs later. There is no backward compatibility support in OSS.

Author: removed statement about EE.

For other cases, data planes work when control plane down or disconnected due to incompatibility.
During the process of migration, old data planes won't response to configuration change.

1. Download 3.0.
2. Stop your old (2.8.2 or beyond) control plane.
3. Configure new control plane to point to the same datastore
   as your old (2.8.2 or beyond) control plane. Run `kong migrations up` and `kong migrations finish`.
4. Start new control plane.
5. Start new data planes.
6. Gradually divert traffic away from your old data planes, and into
   your 3.0.x data planes. Monitor your traffic to make sure everything
   is going smoothly.
7. Gracefully shutdown old data planes.

> ### Upgrade to 3.0.x for other cases

Reviewer: What is "other cases"?

Author: removing it.
